Error Handling and Debugging

When you develop any application that’s more than a trivial example, errors are inevitable. A JSP-based application is no exception. There are many types of errors you will deal with. Simple syntax errors in the JSP pages are almost a given during the development phase. And even after you have fixed all the syntax errors, you may still have to figure out why the application doesn’t work as you intended due to design mistakes. The application must also be designed to deal with problems that can occur when it’s deployed for production use. Users can enter invalid values and try to use the application in ways you never imagined. External systems, such as databases, can fail or become unavailable due to network problems.

Since a web application is the face of a company, making sure it behaves well, even when the users misbehave and the world around it falls apart, is extremely important for a positive customer perception. Proper design and testing is the only way to accomplish this goal. Unfortunately, many developers seem to forget the hard-learned lessons from traditional application development when designing web applications. For instance, a survey of 100 e-commerce managers, conducted by InternetWeek magazine (April 3, 2000 issue), shows that 50% of all web site problems were caused by application coding errors. That’s the highest ranking reason in the survey, ahead of poor server performance (38%), poor service provider performance (35%)
Error handling within the current page
For JSP pages that require more intricate error handling and recovery, a page can be written to directly handle errors from the data bean; that is, handling errors from within the same page. The JSP page can either catch exceptions that are thrown by the data bean or it can check for error codes that are set within each data bean, depending on how the data bean was activated. The JSP page can then take an appropriate recovery action that is based on the error received. A JSP page can use any combination of the following error handling scopes.

The JSP page can use try and catch blocks to capture the exception so that it can take appropriate action that is based on the exception type. Here is an example of a JSP snippet that uses try and catch Java statements:

Set a Breakpoint
The Design/Source view shows you when HTML tags are mismatched or badly formed. However if you have logic errors in the JSP, you may want to debug your file with standard debugging tools. Workshop extends the Eclipse debugger to allow you to debug JSP code.