Programming languages in chemistry: a review of HTML5/JavaScript
Kevin J. Theisen 
Journal of Cheminformatics volume 11, Article number: 11 (2019) Cite this article

11k Accesses

2 Citations

29 Altmetric

Metricsdetails

Abstract
This is one part of a series of reviews concerning the application of programming languages in chemistry, edited by Dr. Rajarshi Guha. This article reviews the JavaScript technology as it applies to the chemistry discipline. A discussion of the history, scope and technical details of the programming language is presented.

Introduction
Computer literacy is an essential skill for scientists. Computers can execute the same operations humans can perform, but far more consistently and at rates far beyond human capability, allowing researchers to investigate numerous hypotheses in short order. Programmers have even more advantages, as they can directly communicate with the computer to achieve their desired goals, as opposed to relying on software someone else has created for another purpose.

Many programming languages have been developed to facilitate instructions to the computer. Each has its advantages, which is why they each exist. Each programming language also has its disadvantages, which is why the rest exist.

When the Internet was introduced, society quickly changed, not just in allowing computers to communicate with each other, but by allowing people to communicate with each other, nearly instantaneously from around the world. JavaScript (JS) is a programming language born of the Internet. From a crude and basic programming language for creating cheap, gimmicky effects on web pages, it has developed into a ubiquitous and flexible technology where engine performance is regarded as a crowning achievement among browser developers. Today, every computational device, from desktops to laptops to mobile phones and Augmented Reality (AR) devices has essential access to the Internet, and therefore contains a web browser wherein JavaScript can be run. As a result, JavaScript is one of the most important programming languages in existence.

This review investigates the relevance and impact of JavaScript on the chemistry discipline. We begin by discussing the history of the programming language; then we investigate the scope and features of the language and how it applies to chemistry; last, an outline of the technical details of the JavaScript programming language is presented to allow those interested in chemistry and cheminformatics to effectively create JavaScript applications.

What is JavaScript?
JavaScript is a programming language enabling developers to interact with the functionality provided by web browsers. More specifically, JavaScript is a scripting language, which means (a) traditionally, JavaScript source code is interpreted at runtime and not pre-compiled into byte code and (b) practically, its main purpose is to modify the behavior of another application typically written in a different programming language, in which it is interpreted and run in real time.

While JavaScript is aptly named as a scripting language, the first part of the name misleadingly refers to the Java programming language [1]. JavaScript has no functional relationship with the Java programming language. The Java part of JavaScript was used to inspire interest in the new scripting language, as Java was and still is a very popular programming language; additionally the original Netscape browser that included JavaScript was written in Java. JavaScript has since become an essential and arguably more important programming language than the one inspiring its name. Hence, the programming language many developers use today to build and interact with web applications is famously known as JavaScript.

Origin
In the early days of the Internet, the web browser provided users with static pages to view information. Innovators at Netscape Communications, producers of the popular Netscape Navigator browser, believed web sites should provide more dynamic material and a programming language would provide a solution. In 1995, Brendan Eich, an employee of Netscape Communications, developed what is now known as JavaScript [2].

Initially, JavaScript only provided basic features, but the power of such a programming language on the web was quickly realized, and the continued success of Netscape Navigator was, in no small part, a reflection of that power. Alternatives to JavaScript were inevitable and a number of companies started to produce more feature-rich browser plug-ins that would install their platforms into browsers to be run in web pages. Adobe Flash [3], Java applets [4] and Microsoft Silverlight [5] are a few well known examples. These plug-ins became popular solutions for developers, but a hindrance for users as plug-ins required installations, had to be frequently updated, and were prone to security issues. Plug-ins eventually fell out of favor with users as HTML5 arrived and JavaScript evolved. Flash, Java applets and Silverlight are all now deprecated technologies.

Other companies, instead of replacing JavaScript, attempted to modify and extend the language in an attempt to control it (a process known as “embrace, extend and extinguish”). In 1996, Microsoft produced JScript [6], which was a reverse engineered version of JavaScript for their Internet Explorer (IE) browser. IE would now be accessible to JavaScript developers, but the implementation was deceitful. Proprietary features specific to IE were built into JScript. As a result, users were forced to use IE for many online applications, impeding the open web in a process known as fragmentation. Fragmentation produces an anti-competitive, positive feedback loop giving a dominant group (in this case, the dominant browser, IE) power over the future direction of the Internet. These attempts ultimately failed due to healthy competition amongst browser developers. Microsoft browsers now aim to legitimately support JavaScript. Creative methods for fragmenting the JavaScript language continue to exist with TypeScript from Microsoft [7] and Dart from Google [8], which aim to provide a more familiar programming syntax for developers and compile into standard JavaScript.

JavaScript has survived many challenges since its inception, and a lot of credit should be given to the Netscape team for their foresight. In order to protect the JavaScript language early on, the Netscape team pushed for an open standardization of the language, and they were successful. We all benefit from the universal and strong support for JavaScript in every existing browser today. In spite of the attempts to replace or commandeer the standard, JavaScript persisted and has become a signature programming language for most developers, and remains an important tool for the scientific communities including chemists.

ECMAScript
The European Computer Manufacturers Association, now known as Ecma International [9], took over the governance and standardization of JavaScript in 1996 and continues to maintain the specification for the language to this day. The JavaScript specification is officially named ECMAScript, defined by the ECMA-262 standard published by Ecma International [10]. So paradoxically, JavaScript led to the development of the ECMAScript standard that now governs the development of JavaScript. JavaScript also contains functionality to access technology standards not governed by Ecma International, such as HTML5 <canvas> [11] and Web Graphics Library (WebGL) [12] for 2D and 3D graphics in webpages.

JavaScript is not the only implementation of ECMAScript. Due to the large number of developers programming in JavaScript (and therefore ECMAScript), ECMAScript has been used as the framework to develop other, non-browser-based technologies. Node.js [13] compiles ECMAScript for server systems. ActionScript [14] was an Adobe implementation of ECMAScript providing scripting functionality to the now deprecated Adobe Flash Player platform. Rhino [15] and its replacement Nashorn engine [16], provide Java based ECMAScript scripting environments in Java applications. The multitude of ECMAScript implementations causes confusion as many engines based on ECMAScript are described as providing a JavaScript environment in their particular platform. This is false and due to name recognition. JavaScript is strictly the web based implementation of ECMAScript for internet browser engines.

While ECMAScript certainly has a range of utility and implementation across a variety of platforms, this review focuses on the JavaScript implementation of ECMAScript as it applies to client side HTML5.

HTML5
The content we view on the Internet is made possible by a union of several technologies, mainly Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) and JavaScript. HTML is an Extensible Markup Language (XML) protocol defining the Document Object Model (DOM). XML is a protocol defined by a clear and extensible syntax of elements and properties [17]. The DOM is an organization of the elements and properties defining the data for the page. CSS provides a powerful way to control the rendering properties of elements in the DOM, as well as selectors for efficiently styling classes and groups. JavaScript is the programming language that allows a developer to perform functions and interact with the DOM.

HTML5 is a moniker describing the most recent iteration of these internet technologies, namely it is the current version (version 5) of HTML. HTML4 defined most of the history of the Internet. HTML4 provided only limited functionality to website authors; therefore solutions like Flash and Java applets came into existence. HTML5 defines features previously only available in plug-ins, directly through native browser functionality while providing extensibility not possible with previous versions of HTML.

New web technologies emerged, such as native video support, localStorage, <canvas>, WebSockets and many more, allowing developers to fully support any application, natively in the browser. Access to these features needed to be facilitated, and the programming language to control all this additional functionality is JavaScript, the native browser language. JavaScript became much more powerful due to the evolution of HTML.

At the time of writing this review, HTML5 has had many years to mature. We now see HTML5 applications across every platform imaginable, fueled by the growth of mobile devices where internet browsers are first class citizens. It is this wealth of functionality, access and ease of distribution that has lead to JavaScript becoming an essential programming language for scientists and especially for chemists. Several large, open source, JavaScript chemistry libraries are actively maintained, including the ChemDoodle Web Components [18], Kekule.js [19] and 3Dmol.js [20], to support the chemistry community.

Features
JavaScript is not developed with scientists in mind and is not, in any way, optimized for the sciences. The first high level programming language, Fortran [21] (“FORmula TRANslation”), was specifically designed to support advanced mathematical and scientific equations, and due to its performance, is still used today in many academic circles. Python [22] is a scripting language with an easy to learn syntax and core libraries dedicated to scientific computing. Yet, JavaScript exhibits a number of unique qualities greatly benefiting scientists. Development tools are available on every scientist’s computer through a web browser, free of charge. Distribution through the Internet is intrinsically supported. The free availability is essential to the core goals of science to distribute fact and information and to inspire and educate individuals to pursue knowledge. Regardless, there are a number of caveats to using JavaScript, and any scientific programmer should be aware of all of the technical features discussed below.

Performance
The speed of calculations is a top priority when considering a programming language. The faster an application is, the more calculations it can compute and the more users it can serve. JavaScript performs on the slower end of programming languages. As a scripting language being run in a web browser, JavaScript cannot be faster than the platform it runs on, typically a C [23] derivative. The interpretation of JavaScript at runtime makes it inherently slower than its platform environment, even when taking advantage of just-in-time (JIT) compilation. Simple JavaScript applications can provide a quick and efficient interface, but will suffer as the complexity of calculations increases. Chemistry algorithms are especially sensitive, where molecules are represented as graph data structures. Runtimes for graph theoretical algorithms will scale exponentially as molecule size increases.